libs/maia-docs/03_developers/05_maia-db/seeding.md, before:

# Seeding System

## Overview

The seeding system bootstraps and populates the database with schemas, configs, and initial data. Used for development and fresh installs.

---

## The Simple Version

Think of seeding like setting up a new house. First you install the plumbing (bootstrap), then you add the furniture (schemas, configs, data). The tree is built in a specific order so everything has what it needs.

---

## When Seeding Runs

- **PEER_FRESH_SEED=true** → Full bootstrap + seed (clean slate)
- **PEER_FRESH_SEED=false** → Use existing scaffold, no seed, no cleanup

---

## Seeding Order

1. **Bootstrap** - Account registries, spark structure
2. **Schemas** - Schema CoValues
3. **Configs** - Actor configs, views, styles, process definitions
4. **Data** - Initial application data
5. **Registry** - Store registry updates

---

## Structure

```
libs/maia-db/src/migrations/seeding/
├── bootstrap.js    # Account registries, spark scaffold
├── configs.js      # Actor configs, views, styles, process
├── data.js         # Initial data
├── helpers.js      # Build meta, ensure spark.os, remove id fields
├── seed.js         # Main seed entry, orchestrates order
└── store-registry.js  # Registry updates
```

---

## Key Exports

- **simpleAccountSeed** - Minimal seed (registries via link)
- **seed** - Full seed (bootstrap + schemas + configs + data)
- **schemaMigration** - Schema migration utilities

---

## Reference Props

Config references (actor, context, view, process, brand, style, inbox, etc.) are transformed during seeding. Human-readable IDs (`@schema/...`) become co-ids (`co_z...`).

---

## Related Documentation

- [storage-layer.md](./storage-layer.md) - CRUD operations
- [schema-indexing.md](./schema-indexing.md) - Automatic indexing
- [maia-engines](../04_maia-engines/README.md) - DataEngine seed op

Commit message:

[fix] consolidate tab switch fix: generic tabs, schema alignment, docs
- Generic data-driven tabs view (view.maia, process.maia)
- Align maia-script-expression schema with evaluator (/ paths, items alias, / single values)
- Remove diagnostic logging from engines
- Document $find, $event.field, $$key vs $event.key in expressions.md
- Co-id purity: store-reader throws on refs, fail-fast process load
- CoCache + update.js integration for local-first

libs/maia-docs/03_developers/05_maia-db/seeding.md, after:

# Seeding System

## Overview

The seeding system bootstraps and populates the database with schemas, configs, and initial data. Used for development and fresh installs.

---

## The Simple Version

Think of seeding like setting up a new house. First you install the plumbing (bootstrap), then you add the furniture (schemas, configs, data). The tree is built in a specific order so everything has what it needs.

---

## When Seeding Runs

- **PEER_FRESH_SEED=true** → Full bootstrap + seed (clean slate)
- **PEER_FRESH_SEED=false** → Use existing scaffold, no seed, no cleanup

### When to Re-seed

**Re-seed when actor, process, view, or context configs change.** Runtime expects all config references to be co-ids. Refs are transformed to co-ids only during seeding. If you modify `.maia` files (actors, processes, views, contexts) or the seed config, run with `PEER_FRESH_SEED=true` before testing. Otherwise the app may fail with "Expected co-id, got ref" or process load errors.

```bash
PEER_FRESH_SEED=true bun dev:moai
```

---

## Seeding Order

1. **Bootstrap** - Account registries, spark structure
2. **Schemas** - Schema CoValues
3. **Configs** - Actor configs, views, styles, process definitions
4. **Data** - Initial application data
5. **Registry** - Store registry updates

---

## Structure

```
libs/maia-db/src/migrations/seeding/
├── bootstrap.js    # Account registries, spark scaffold
├── configs.js      # Actor configs, views, styles, process
├── data.js         # Initial data
├── helpers.js      # Build meta, ensure spark.os, remove id fields
├── seed.js         # Main seed entry, orchestrates order
└── store-registry.js  # Registry updates
```

---

## Key Exports

- **simpleAccountSeed** - Minimal seed (registries via link)
- **seed** - Full seed (bootstrap + schemas + configs + data)
- **schemaMigration** - Schema migration utilities

---

## Reference Props

Config references (actor, context, view, process, brand, style, inbox, etc.) are transformed during seeding. Human-readable IDs (`@schema/...`) become co-ids (`co_z...`).

---

## Related Documentation

- [storage-layer.md](./storage-layer.md) - CRUD operations
- [schema-indexing.md](./schema-indexing.md) - Automatic indexing
- [maia-engines](../04_maia-engines/README.md) - DataEngine seed op
