services/maia-city/README.md, before:

# Maia City Service

The main UI service for MaiaOS, featuring:
- **Database Inspector** at `/` (root) - Explore Jazz CoValues with authentication
- **Todos Vibe Example** at `/vibes/todos.html` - Full-stack JSON DSL compositor demo

## Structure

```
services/maia-city/
├── index.html          # Main app (database inspector)
├── main.js             # Main app logic
├── vibes/
│   ├── todos.html      # Todos vibe entry point
│   └── todos/          # Todos vibe components
│       ├── todos.vibe.maia
│       ├── brand.style.maia
│       ├── todo.style.maia
│       ├── vibe/       # Vibe actor files
│       ├── composite/  # Composite actor files
│       ├── list/       # List actor files
│       ├── list-item/  # List item actor files
│       └── kanban/     # Kanban actor files
└── css/                # Global styles

```

## Dependencies

- `@MaiaOS/kernel` - Kernel functionality (Jazz, auth)
- `@MaiaOS/db` - Database utilities
- `@MaiaOS/script` - MaiaScript engine (Actor system, DSL)

## Development

```bash
# From root
bun dev

# Or directly
cd services/maia-city
bun run dev
```

Server runs on **http://localhost:4200**

## Routes

- **/** - Database inspector (requires passkey auth)
- **/vibes/todos.html** - Todos example (no auth required)

## Architecture

### Clean Import Pattern

The todos example demonstrates clean import/export pattern:

**maia-kernel exports:**
```javascript
// libs/maia-kernel/src/index.js
export { MaiaOS } from "./kernel.js";
```

**maia-script exports:**
```javascript
// libs/maia-script/src/index.js
export { ActorEngine, ViewEngine, StyleEngine, ... } from "./engines/...";
```

**maia-city imports:**
```javascript
// services/maia-city/vibes/todos.html
import { MaiaOS } from '@MaiaOS/kernel';
const os = await MaiaOS.boot({ ... });
```

**Vite resolves** `@MaiaOS/script` to `../../libs/maia-script/src/index.js` via `vite.config.js`.

### Tools Path

Tools are loaded from the maia-script package. The ToolEngine resolves paths relative to the HTML file location, so we use `/vibes/todos` as the base and it will find tools in the maia-script package via Vite's module resolution.

## Port

- **4200** (hardcoded in vite.config.js)

Commit message:

feat: migrate todos vibe to fully reactive CoJSON CRDT backend
Migrate todos vibe from mocked IndexedDB to fully end-to-end dynamic CoJSON backend API with CRDT-based reactive system.

Key improvements:
- Full CoJSON CRDT backend integration with reactive subscriptions
- Dynamic schema resolution at runtime (no hardcoded lookups)
- Cross-actor reactivity for filtered queries (kanban/list views sync in real-time)
- Actor-level query coordination and dependency management
- Hard delete implementation using native CoList.delete() and CoMap clearing
- Fixed drag and drop with proper schema resolution fallbacks
- Removed soft delete filtering (now using hard delete)
- Improved subscription engine with unified data/config subscriptions
- Enhanced state engine with schema expression fallback resolution
- Proper CoList-based single source of truth for data collections

Architectural changes:
- Backend tracks all ReactiveStore instances per CoValue for cross-actor updates
- Subscription engine tracks query-to-schema mapping at actor level
- State engine resolves schema expressions with intelligent fallbacks
- View engine properly handles dynamic schema resolution in events
- Operations API fully integrated with CoJSON backend

This enables true collaborative real-time updates across all actors and views.

services/maia-city/README.md, after:

# Maia City Service

The main UI service for MaiaOS, featuring:
- **Database Inspector** at `/` (root) - Explore Jazz CoValues with authentication
- **Dynamic Vibe Rendering** - Load and render vibes dynamically (e.g., Todos Vibe via navigation)

## Structure

```
services/maia-city/
├── index.html          # Main app (database inspector)
├── main.js             # Main app logic
├── db-view.js          # Database viewer and dynamic vibe renderer
├── vibes/
│   └── todos/          # Todos vibe components
│       ├── todos.vibe.maia
│       ├── brand.style.maia
│       ├── todo.style.maia
│       ├── vibe/       # Vibe actor files
│       ├── composite/  # Composite actor files
│       ├── list/       # List actor files
│       ├── list-item/  # List item actor files
│       └── kanban/     # Kanban actor files
└── css/                # Global styles

```

## Dependencies

- `@MaiaOS/kernel` - Kernel functionality (Jazz, auth)
- `@MaiaOS/db` - Database utilities
- `@MaiaOS/script` - MaiaScript engine (Actor system, DSL)

## Development

```bash
# From root
bun dev

# Or directly
cd services/maia-city
bun run dev
```

Server runs on **http://localhost:4200**

## Routes

- **/** - Database inspector (requires passkey auth)
  - Includes dynamic vibe rendering - navigate to "Todos Vibe" in the sidebar to load vibes dynamically

## Architecture

### Dynamic Vibe Rendering

Vibes are loaded dynamically within the main maia-city app. When a user navigates to a vibe (e.g., "Todos Vibe" in the sidebar), the app:

1. Calls `loadVibe('todos')` which sets `currentVibe = 'todos'`
2. Renders a container div in the main view area
3. Calls `maia.loadVibeFromAccount('todos', container)` to load the vibe from the account's vibes registry
4. The vibe renders inline within the database inspector interface

**Example:**
```javascript
// In services/maia-city/main.js
async function loadVibe(vibeKey) {
  currentVibe = vibeKey;
  await renderAppInternal(); // Renders vibe container
  // db-view.js handles actual vibe loading via maia.loadVibeFromAccount()
}
```

### Clean Import Pattern

**maia-kernel exports:**
```javascript
// libs/maia-kernel/src/index.js
export { MaiaOS } from "./kernel.js";
```

**maia-script exports:**
```javascript
// libs/maia-script/src/index.js
export { ActorEngine, ViewEngine, StyleEngine, ... } from "./engines/...";
```

**maia-city imports:**
```javascript
// services/maia-city/main.js
import { MaiaOS } from '@MaiaOS/kernel';
const os = await MaiaOS.boot({ node, account });
```

**Vite resolves** `@MaiaOS/script` to `../../libs/maia-script/src/index.js` via `vite.config.js`.

## Port

- **4200** (hardcoded in vite.config.js)
