services/sync/README.md, before:

# Zero Sync Service

Zero sync service using Rocicorp's Zero sync engine for real-time data synchronization.

## Overview

This service runs `zero-cache-dev` (development) or `zero-cache` (production) to sync data from PostgreSQL to clients via WebSocket connections.

## Admin Password

The `--admin-password` flag is used for **debugging and administration** of the Zero cache server:

- **Purpose**: Access admin endpoints like `/statz` (stats endpoint) for monitoring and debugging
- **Required**: Optional, but recommended for production debugging
- **Value**: Uses `ZERO_AUTH_SECRET` (defaults to `AUTH_SECRET` if not set)
- **Security**: Should be a strong, random password (same as your `AUTH_SECRET`)

**What it's used for:**
- Accessing `/statz` endpoint for server statistics and health monitoring
- Debugging Zero cache server state
- Admin operations on the Zero sync service

**Note**: This is separate from user authentication - it's for server administration only. User authentication is handled via Better Auth cookies.

## Environment Variables

- `ZERO_POSTGRES_SECRET` - PostgreSQL connection string (non-pooler, required)
- `AUTH_SECRET` - Shared auth secret (used for admin password if `ZERO_AUTH_SECRET` not set)
- `ZERO_AUTH_SECRET` - Zero-specific auth secret (optional, defaults to `AUTH_SECRET`)

## Development

```bash
bun dev  # Runs migration + zero-cache-dev
```

## Production

Uses Docker image `rocicorp/zero:0.24.3000000000` with `zero-cache` binary.

Commit message:

docs: clarify AUTH_SECRET usage and admin password fallback
- Update README to document that AUTH_SECRET is used for all auth purposes
- Clarify that ZERO_AUTH_SECRET and ZERO_ADMIN_AUTH are both set from AUTH_SECRET
- Update Dockerfile comments to explain the fallback logic
- Document that fallback is safe since both vars are set to same value in production

services/sync/README.md, after:

# Zero Sync Service

Zero sync service using Rocicorp's Zero sync engine for real-time data synchronization.

## Overview

This service runs `zero-cache-dev` (development) or `zero-cache` (production) to sync data from PostgreSQL to clients via WebSocket connections.

## Admin Password

The `--admin-password` flag is used for **debugging and administration** of the Zero cache server:

- **Purpose**: Access admin endpoints like `/statz` (stats endpoint) for monitoring and debugging
- **Required**: Required in production mode
- **Value**: Uses `ZERO_ADMIN_AUTH` environment variable (set to `AUTH_SECRET` in production)
- **Security**: Should be a strong, random password (same as your `AUTH_SECRET`)

**What it's used for:**
- Accessing `/statz` endpoint for server statistics and health monitoring
- Debugging Zero cache server state
- Admin operations on the Zero sync service

**Note**: This is separate from user authentication - it's for server administration only. User authentication is handled via Better Auth cookies.

## Environment Variables

- `ZERO_POSTGRES_SECRET` - PostgreSQL connection string (non-pooler, required)
- `AUTH_SECRET` - Shared auth secret (used for both JWT verification and admin password)
- `ZERO_AUTH_SECRET` - Zero JWT auth secret (set to `AUTH_SECRET` in production)
- `ZERO_ADMIN_AUTH` - Zero admin password (set to `AUTH_SECRET` in production)

**Note**: In practice, we use `AUTH_SECRET` for all three purposes. The separate environment variables (`ZERO_AUTH_SECRET` and `ZERO_ADMIN_AUTH`) are set from `AUTH_SECRET` during deployment for clarity, but they all use the same value.

## Development

```bash
bun dev  # Runs migration + zero-cache-dev
```

## Production

Uses Docker image `rocicorp/zero:0.24.3000000000` with `zero-cache` binary.
