libs/maia-docs/03_developers/03_maia-schemata/README.md, before:

# maia-schemata: Schema Validation and Transformation

## Overview

The `maia-schemata` package is MaiaOS's centralized schema validation and transformation system. Think of it as the quality control inspector for your MaiaOS applications - it checks that everything is built correctly before it goes into production.

**What it does:**
- ✅ Validates all `.maia` files against JSON Schema definitions
- ✅ Transforms human-readable references to co-ids during seeding
- ✅ Provides runtime validation for application data
- ✅ Supports CoJSON types (CoMap, CoList, CoStream) via custom AJV plugin

**Why it matters:**
Without schema validation, a typo in a `.maia` file could cause your entire app to break in mysterious ways. The validation system catches these errors early with clear, helpful messages.

---

## The Simple Version

Think of schemas like blueprints for houses. When you're building a house, you need to follow the blueprint exactly - the door can't be where the window should be, and the foundation needs to be the right size.

In MaiaOS:
- **Schemas** = Blueprints (they define what's allowed)
- **Validation** = Quality inspector (checks if you followed the blueprint)
- **Transformation** = Converting your blueprint to the builder's language (human-readable IDs → co-ids)

**Example:**
```javascript
// You write this in your .maia file:
{
  "actor": {
    "name": "my-actor",
    "view": { "type": "div" }
  }
}

// The validation system checks:
// ✅ Does it have a "name"? Yes!
// ✅ Is "name" a string? Yes!
// ✅ Does it have a "view"? Yes!
// ✅ Is "view" a valid view object? Yes!
// Result: ✅ Valid!
```

---

## Package Structure

```
libs/maia-schemata/src/
├── index.js                    # Main exports (schemas, ValidationEngine)
├── validation.engine.js        # Core validation engine (AJV wrapper)
├── validation.helper.js        # Convenience functions (singleton, error formatting)
├── schema-transformer.js       # Transform schemas/instances for seeding
├── co-id-generator.js          # Generate co-ids for seeding
├── schema-loader.js            # Load schemas from IndexedDB
├── ajv-co-types-plugin.js     # AJV plugin for CoJSON types
├── os/                         # Operating system schemas
│   ├── actor.schema.json
│   ├── context.schema.json
│   ├── state.schema.json
│   ├── view.schema.json
│   ├── meta.schema.json        # CoJSON meta-schema
│   └── base-meta-schema.json   # JSON Schema Draft 2020-12 meta-schema
└── data/                       # Application data schemas
    └── todos.schema.json
```

---

## Key Components

### 1. ValidationEngine

The core validation system. Wraps AJV (Another JSON Schema Validator) and adds CoJSON support.

**What it does:**
- Loads and compiles JSON schemas
- Validates data against schemas
- Resolves schema dependencies ($schema, $co references)
- Handles co-id references from IndexedDB

**See:** [Validation Engine Details](./validation.md)

### 2. Schema Transformer

Converts human-readable references to co-ids during the seeding process.

**What it does:**
- Transforms `@schema/actor` → `co_z123...`
- Handles nested query objects (`{schema: "@schema/todos", filter: {...}}`)
- Transforms tool payloads and action targets

**See:** [Schema Transformation](./transformation.md)

### 3. Co-ID Generator

Generates deterministic co-ids for schemas, instances, and data entities.

**What it does:**
- Creates random co-ids in format `co_z[A-Za-z0-9]{43}`
- Tracks mappings via CoIdRegistry
- Currently generates random IDs (future: content-addressable hashing)

**See:** [Co-ID Generation](./co-id-generation.md)

### 4. AJV CoJSON Plugin

Custom AJV plugin that adds support for CoJSON types.

**What it does:**
- Adds `cotype` keyword (validates comap/colist/costream at schema root)
- Adds `$co` keyword (macro for co-id references in properties)
- Handles both direct arrays and wrapped objects for colist/costream

**See:** [CoJSON Integration](./cojson-integration.md)

---

## How It Works

### The Validation Flow

```
1. Load Schema
   └─> Get schema from registry (os/ or data/)
   └─> Compile with AJV
   └─> Cache compiled validator

2. Validate Data
   └─> Run data through compiled validator
   └─> Collect all errors (not just first)
   └─> Format errors for readability

3. Handle Errors
   └─> Show clear error messages
   └─> Point to exact field that failed
   └─> Suggest fixes
```

### The Seeding Flow

```
1. Load Schemas
   └─> Read all schema files from os/ and data/
   └─> Generate co-ids for each schema
   └─> Build dependency graph

2. Transform Schemas
   └─> Replace @schema/... references with co-ids
   └─> Transform $co references
   └─> Preserve structure

3. Transform Instances
   └─> Transform query objects ({schema: "@schema/todos"})
   └─> Transform tool payloads
   └─> Transform action targets

4. Seed to IndexedDB
   └─> Store schemas with co-ids as keys
   └─> Store instances with co-ids as keys
   └─> Register mappings in CoIdRegistry
```

---

## Common Patterns

### Validating a Schema File

```javascript
import { validateOrThrow } from '@MaiaOS/schemata/validation.helper';

try {
  await validateOrThrow('actor', actorData, 'path/to/actor.maia');
  console.log('✅ Valid!');
} catch (error) {
  console.error('❌ Validation failed:', error.message);
}
```

### Getting a Schema

```javascript
import { getSchema } from '@MaiaOS/schemata';

const actorSchema = getSchema('actor');
console.log(actorSchema); // Full JSON Schema object
```

### Transforming for Seeding

```javascript
import { transformSchemaForSeeding } from '@MaiaOS/schemata/schema-transformer';

const coIdMap = new Map([
  ['@schema/actor', 'co_z123...'],
  ['@schema/context', 'co_z456...']
]);

const transformedSchema = transformSchemaForSeeding(actorSchema, coIdMap);
// All @schema/... references are now co-ids
```

### Generating Co-IDs

```javascript
import { generateCoId, CoIdRegistry } from '@MaiaOS/schemata/co-id-generator';

const registry = new CoIdRegistry();
const schemaCoId = generateCoId(schema);
registry.register('@schema/actor', schemaCoId);

// Later, retrieve the co-id
const coId = registry.get('@schema/actor'); // Returns 'co_z123...'
```

---

## Integration Points

### With maia-script

The `maia-script` package uses `maia-schemata` for:
- Validating `.maia` files during parsing
- Transforming schemas/instances before seeding to IndexedDB
- Runtime validation of data operations

**See:** `libs/maia-script/src/o/engines/db-engine/backend/indexeddb.js`

### With maia-db

The `maia-db` package uses `maia-schemata` for:
- Loading schemas from IndexedDB for validation
- Resolving co-id references during validation
- Validating data before create/update operations

---

## Key Concepts

### Schema Types

**OS Schemas** (`os/`):
- Define MaiaOS system types (actor, context, state, view, etc.)
- Used for validating `.maia` file definitions
- Examples: `actor.schema.json`, `context.schema.json`

**Data Schemas** (`data/`):
- Define application data types (todos, notes, etc.)
- Used for runtime validation of user data
- Examples: `todos.schema.json`

### Meta-Schemas

**Base Meta-Schema** (`base-meta-schema.json`):
- JSON Schema Draft 2020-12 meta-schema
- Validates all standard JSON Schema schemas
- Extracted from hardcoded object to JSON file

**CoJSON Meta-Schema** (`meta.schema.json`):
- Extends base meta-schema with CoJSON vocabulary
- Adds `cotype` and `$co` keywords
- Validates MaiaOS-specific schemas

### Reference Types

**$schema**:
- Points to the meta-schema that validates this schema
- Can be human-readable (`@schema/meta`) or co-id (`co_z123...`)
- Resolved dynamically during validation

**$co**:
- References another schema (for properties/items)
- Can be human-readable (`@schema/actor`) or co-id (`co_z123...`)
- Transformed to co-id during seeding

**$ref**:
- Internal schema reference (within same schema)
- Uses JSON Schema `$ref` syntax (`#/$defs/...`)
- Not transformed (stays as-is)

---

## Troubleshooting

### Problem: "Schema missing required $schema field"

**Solution:** Every schema must declare which meta-schema validates it:
```json
{
  "$schema": "@schema/meta",
  "$id": "@schema/actor",
  ...
}
```

### Problem: "No co-id found for query object schema"

**Solution:** Make sure data collection schemas are registered before transforming instances:
```javascript
// Register data collection schema first
coIdRegistry.register('@schema/todos', todosCoId);

// Then transform instances that reference it
transformInstanceForSeeding(instance, coIdMap);
```

### Problem: "Validation failed: must pass 'cotype' keyword validation"

**Solution:** Add `cotype` to schema root for CoJSON types:
```json
{
  "$schema": "@schema/meta",
  "cotype": "comap",
  "properties": { ... }
}
```

---

## Related Documentation

- [Schema Definitions](../03_schemas.md) - Schema structure and usage
- [Validation Engine Details](./validation.md) - How ValidationEngine works
- [Schema Transformation](./transformation.md) - How transformation works
- [CoJSON Integration](./cojson-integration.md) - CoJSON types support
- [CoJSON Architecture](../architecture/cojson.md) - CoJSON system overview

---

## Source Files

- Main entry: `libs/maia-schemata/src/index.js`
- Validation engine: `libs/maia-schemata/src/validation.engine.js`
- Validation helper: `libs/maia-schemata/src/validation.helper.js`
- Schema transformer: `libs/maia-schemata/src/schema-transformer.js`
- Co-ID generator: `libs/maia-schemata/src/co-id-generator.js`
- AJV plugin: `libs/maia-schemata/src/ajv-co-types-plugin.js`

Commit message:

fix: resolve ReactiveStore subscription cache issue in DB viewer
- Fix ReactiveStore initialization when subscriptions are reused from cache
- Ensure new ReactiveStore instances get current CoValue data immediately
- Add subscription management in DB viewer for reactive updates
- Make DB viewer subscribe to ReactiveStore updates for real-time UI updates
- Fix query all CoValues operation (support read without schema)
- Add debug logging for subscription and data loading tracking

Fixes issue where navigating back to account showed empty properties due to
subscription cache reusing old subscriptions that updated stale ReactiveStores.

libs/maia-docs/03_developers/03_maia-schemata/README.md, after:

# maia-schemata: Schema Validation and Transformation

## Overview

The `maia-schemata` package is MaiaOS's centralized schema validation and transformation system. Think of it as the quality control inspector for your MaiaOS applications - it checks that everything is built correctly before it goes into production.

**What it does:**
- ✅ Validates all `.maia` files against JSON Schema definitions
- ✅ Transforms human-readable references to co-ids during seeding
- ✅ Provides runtime validation for application data
- ✅ Supports CoJSON types (CoMap, CoList, CoStream) via custom AJV plugin

**Why it matters:**
Without schema validation, a typo in a `.maia` file could cause your entire app to break in mysterious ways. The validation system catches these errors early with clear, helpful messages.

---

## The Simple Version

Think of schemas like blueprints for houses. When you're building a house, you need to follow the blueprint exactly - the door can't be where the window should be, and the foundation needs to be the right size.

In MaiaOS:
- **Schemas** = Blueprints (they define what's allowed)
- **Validation** = Quality inspector (checks if you followed the blueprint)
- **Transformation** = Converting your blueprint to the builder's language (human-readable IDs → co-ids)

**Example:**
```javascript
// You write this in your .maia file:
{
  "actor": {
    "name": "my-actor",
    "view": { "type": "div" }
  }
}

// The validation system checks:
// ✅ Does it have a "name"? Yes!
// ✅ Is "name" a string? Yes!
// ✅ Does it have a "view"? Yes!
// ✅ Is "view" a valid view object? Yes!
// Result: ✅ Valid!
```

---

## Package Structure

```
libs/maia-schemata/src/
├── index.js                    # Main exports (schemas, ValidationEngine)
├── validation.engine.js        # Core validation engine (AJV wrapper)
├── validation.helper.js        # Convenience functions (singleton, error formatting)
├── schema-transformer.js       # Transform schemas/instances for seeding
├── co-id-generator.js          # Generate co-ids for seeding
├── schema-loader.js            # Load schemas from IndexedDB
├── ajv-co-types-plugin.js     # AJV plugin for CoJSON types
├── os/                         # Operating system schemas
│   ├── actor.schema.json
│   ├── context.schema.json
│   ├── state.schema.json
│   ├── view.schema.json
│   ├── meta.schema.json        # CoJSON meta-schema
│   └── base-meta-schema.json   # JSON Schema Draft 2020-12 meta-schema
└── data/                       # Application data schemas
    └── todos.schema.json
```

---

## Key Components

### 1. ValidationEngine

The core validation system. Wraps AJV (Another JSON Schema Validator) and adds CoJSON support.

**What it does:**
- Loads and compiles JSON schemas
- Validates data against schemas
- Resolves schema dependencies ($schema, $co references)
- Handles co-id references from IndexedDB

**See:** [Validation Engine Details](./validation.md)

### 2. Schema Transformer

Converts human-readable references to co-ids during the seeding process.

**What it does:**
- Transforms `@schema/actor` → `co_z123...`
- Handles nested query objects (`{schema: "@schema/todos", filter: {...}}`)
- Transforms tool payloads and action targets

**See:** [Schema Transformation](./transformation.md)

### 3. Co-ID Generator

Generates deterministic co-ids for schemas, instances, and data entities.

**What it does:**
- Creates random co-ids in format `co_z[A-Za-z0-9]{43}`
- Tracks mappings via CoIdRegistry
- Currently generates random IDs (future: content-addressable hashing)

**See:** [Co-ID Generation](./co-id-generation.md)

### 4. AJV CoJSON Plugin

Custom AJV plugin that adds support for CoJSON types.

**What it does:**
- Adds `cotype` keyword (validates comap/colist/costream at schema root)
- Adds `$co` keyword (macro for co-id references in properties)
- Handles both direct arrays and wrapped objects for colist/costream

**See:** [CoJSON Integration](./cojson-integration.md)

---

## How It Works

### The Validation Flow

```
1. Load Schema
   └─> Get schema from registry (os/ or data/)
   └─> Compile with AJV
   └─> Cache compiled validator

2. Validate Data
   └─> Run data through compiled validator
   └─> Collect all errors (not just first)
   └─> Format errors for readability

3. Handle Errors
   └─> Show clear error messages
   └─> Point to exact field that failed
   └─> Suggest fixes
```

### The Seeding Flow

```
1. Load Schemas
   └─> Read all schema files from os/ and data/
   └─> Generate co-ids for each schema
   └─> Build dependency graph

2. Transform Schemas
   └─> Replace @schema/... references with co-ids
   └─> Transform $co references
   └─> Preserve structure

3. Transform Instances
   └─> Transform query objects ({schema: "@schema/todos"})
   └─> Transform tool payloads
   └─> Transform action targets

4. Seed to IndexedDB
   └─> Store schemas with co-ids as keys
   └─> Store instances with co-ids as keys
   └─> Register mappings in CoIdRegistry
```

---

## Common Patterns

### Validating a Schema File

```javascript
import { validateOrThrow } from '@MaiaOS/schemata/validation.helper';

try {
  await validateOrThrow('actor', actorData, 'path/to/actor.maia');
  console.log('✅ Valid!');
} catch (error) {
  console.error('❌ Validation failed:', error.message);
}
```

### Getting a Schema

```javascript
import { getSchema } from '@MaiaOS/schemata';

const actorSchema = getSchema('actor');
console.log(actorSchema); // Full JSON Schema object
```

### Transforming for Seeding

```javascript
import { transformSchemaForSeeding } from '@MaiaOS/schemata/schema-transformer';

const coIdMap = new Map([
  ['@schema/actor', 'co_z123...'],
  ['@schema/context', 'co_z456...']
]);

const transformedSchema = transformSchemaForSeeding(actorSchema, coIdMap);
// All @schema/... references are now co-ids
```

### Generating Co-IDs

```javascript
import { generateCoId, CoIdRegistry } from '@MaiaOS/schemata/co-id-generator';

const registry = new CoIdRegistry();
const schemaCoId = generateCoId(schema);
registry.register('@schema/actor', schemaCoId);

// Later, retrieve the co-id
const coId = registry.get('@schema/actor'); // Returns 'co_z123...'
```

---

## Integration Points

### With maia-script

The `maia-script` package uses `maia-schemata` for:
- Validating `.maia` files during parsing
- Transforming schemas/instances before seeding to IndexedDB
- Runtime validation of data operations

**See:** `libs/maia-script/src/o/engines/db-engine/backend/indexeddb.js`

### With maia-db

The `maia-db` package uses `maia-schemata` for:
- Loading schemas from IndexedDB for validation
- Resolving co-id references during validation
- Validating data before create/update operations

### With maia-operations

The `maia-operations` package uses `maia-schemata` for:
- Validating data against schemas in create/update operations
- Loading schemas from database for validation
- Schema validation is enforced by operations (100% migration - no fallbacks)

**See:** `libs/maia-operations/src/operations/create.js` and `libs/maia-operations/src/operations/update.js`

---

## Key Concepts

### Schema Types

**OS Schemas** (`os/`):
- Define MaiaOS system types (actor, context, state, view, etc.)
- Used for validating `.maia` file definitions
- Examples: `actor.schema.json`, `context.schema.json`

**Data Schemas** (`data/`):
- Define application data types (todos, notes, etc.)
- Used for runtime validation of user data
- Examples: `todos.schema.json`

### Meta-Schemas

**Base Meta-Schema** (`base-meta-schema.json`):
- JSON Schema Draft 2020-12 meta-schema
- Validates all standard JSON Schema schemas
- Extracted from hardcoded object to JSON file

**CoJSON Meta-Schema** (`meta.schema.json`):
- Extends base meta-schema with CoJSON vocabulary
- Adds `cotype` and `$co` keywords
- Validates MaiaOS-specific schemas

### Reference Types

**$schema**:
- Points to the meta-schema that validates this schema
- Can be human-readable (`@schema/meta`) or co-id (`co_z123...`)
- Resolved dynamically during validation

**$co**:
- References another schema (for properties/items)
- Can be human-readable (`@schema/actor`) or co-id (`co_z123...`)
- Transformed to co-id during seeding

**$ref**:
- Internal schema reference (within same schema)
- Uses JSON Schema `$ref` syntax (`#/$defs/...`)
- Not transformed (stays as-is)

---

## Troubleshooting

### Problem: "Schema missing required $schema field"

**Solution:** Every schema must declare which meta-schema validates it:
```json
{
  "$schema": "@schema/meta",
  "$id": "@schema/actor",
  ...
}
```

### Problem: "No co-id found for query object schema"

**Solution:** Make sure data collection schemas are registered before transforming instances:
```javascript
// Register data collection schema first
coIdRegistry.register('@schema/todos', todosCoId);

// Then transform instances that reference it
transformInstanceForSeeding(instance, coIdMap);
```

### Problem: "Validation failed: must pass 'cotype' keyword validation"

**Solution:** Add `cotype` to schema root for CoJSON types:
```json
{
  "$schema": "@schema/meta",
  "cotype": "comap",
  "properties": { ... }
}
```

---

## Related Documentation

- [maia-operations Package](../06_maia-operations/README.md) - Operations layer that uses schema validation
- [Schema Definitions](../03_schemas.md) - Schema structure and usage
- [Validation Engine Details](./validation.md) - How ValidationEngine works
- [Schema Transformation](./transformation.md) - How transformation works
- [CoJSON Integration](./cojson-integration.md) - CoJSON types support
- [CoJSON Architecture](../05_maia-db/cojson.md) - CoJSON system overview

---

## Source Files

- Main entry: `libs/maia-schemata/src/index.js`
- Validation engine: `libs/maia-schemata/src/validation.engine.js`
- Validation helper: `libs/maia-schemata/src/validation.helper.js`
- Schema transformer: `libs/maia-schemata/src/schema-transformer.js`
- Co-ID generator: `libs/maia-schemata/src/co-id-generator.js`
- AJV plugin: `libs/maia-schemata/src/ajv-co-types-plugin.js`
